.\" Man page for the honcho-inspector backend
.\" Render with: groff -man -Tutf8 docs/honcho-inspector.1 | less
.\" Install with: install -m 0644 docs/honcho-inspector.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.\" Then: man honcho-inspector
.TH HONCHO-INSPECTOR 1 "2026-06-22" "0.1.0" "Honcho Inspector Backend"
.SH NAME
honcho-inspector \- multi-user admin surface for Honcho workspaces
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B honcho-inspector
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B honcho-inspector
is a single-jar Spring Boot 3.5 / Java 25 service that sits between
the Angular
.B honcho-inspector
UI and one or more Honcho instances. It keeps Honcho API keys off
the browser, persists per-user encrypted profiles, and exposes a
multi-user admin surface (one SQLite database, no external service
to run).

The service is multi-tenant at the user level (every user has their
own profiles, sessions, and audit visibility) and admin-managed
(there is no public sign-up; the first admin is created by the
bootstrap, every subsequent user is created by an admin).

It is the backend half of the
.B honcho-inspector
product; the UI lives in a separate repository.
.PP
The service MUST sit behind a TLS-terminating reverse proxy in any
internet-reachable environment. See
.BR reverse-proxy.md
in the project source tree for nginx, Apache, and Caddy examples.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\- " " "\fIspring\-boot args\fR"
Everything after
.B \-\-
is passed to Spring Boot. The launcher script already sets
.B HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR
based on the OS (see
.B FILES
below); other Spring properties can be set on the command line
with the standard Spring relaxed binding.
.IP
Example: bind to a non-default port and set the log level:
.PP
.RS 8
.B honcho-inspector \-\- \-\-server.port=9090 \-\-logging.level.com.revytechinc=DEBUG
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print the Spring Boot usage banner and exit. (The
.B honcho-inspector help
subcommand, by contrast, prints the
.BR "EMERGENCY ACTIONS" " usage, which is a different output.)"
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the Spring Boot version and exit.
.PP
If the first non\-flag argument is a known
.BR "EMERGENCY ACTIONS"
subcommand (see below), the launcher dispatches to the CLI handler
instead of starting the web server. The CLI runs in a minimal Spring
context (no HTTP server) and the JVM exits with the subcommand's
exit code (see
.BR "EXIT STATUS" ")."
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The service uses standard Spring Boot relaxed binding; every
property can be set as an environment variable in addition to a
command-line flag or a yaml file. The launcher also sets
.B HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR
based on the OS unless it is already in the environment.
.PP
\fBServer / runtime\fR
.TP
.B PORT
Default:
.BR 8080 .
Binds the Spring
.B server.port
property.
.TP
.B CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS
Default:
.BR http://localhost:4200,http://127.0.0.1:4200 .
Comma-separated list of allowed origins. Must list the exact
public origin of the UI in production. No wildcards.
.TP
.B SESSION_TTL_MINUTES
Default:
.BR 0
(never expire). Set non-zero (e.g.
.BR 60 )
to expire idle auth sessions; the column
.B auth_sessions.expires_at
is the trigger. Expired sessions are NOT auto-reaped; run
.B POST /api/admin/maintenance/sessions/purge-expired
from a cron, or use the
.B SESSION_TTL_MINUTES=0
default.
.TP
.B HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR
Default: OS-aware (see
.BR FILES ).
The directory holding the drop-in
.B application.yml
and the SQLite database.
.TP
.B HONCHO_DB_PATH
Default:
.BR jdbc:sqlite:${HONCHO_DB_FILE:honcho-inspector.db} .
Override the JDBC URL. Use
.BR jdbc:sqlite::memory:
for ephemeral test databases. (Setting this on the command line
is silently ignored because of YAML binding precedence; the
environment variable is the correct knob.)
.TP
.B HONCHO_DB_FILE
Default:
.BR honcho-inspector.db .
The SQLite filename, resolved against
.BR HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR .
.TP
.B HONCHO_CRYPTO_KEY
Default: ephemeral random (data lost on restart).
Base64 32 bytes; encrypts profile API keys at rest with
AES-256-GCM. Generate with
.BR "openssl rand \-base64 32" .
If unset, the service logs a warning and uses a random key that
is lost on restart, which makes the encrypted profile data
unreadable.
.TP
.B HONCHO_LOG_LEVEL
Default:
.BR INFO .
Root + the project packages; Spring Web logs at the same level.
.TP
.B HONCHO_LOG_MAX_FILE_SIZE
Default:
.BR 100MB .
Active JSONL file cap before mid-day roll.
.TP
.B HONCHO_LOG_MAX_HISTORY
Default:
.BR 30 .
Number of days of rotated
.B .jsonl.gz
files kept.
.TP
.B HONCHO_LOG_TOTAL_SIZE_CAP
Default:
.BR 500MB .
Total disk cap across active + rotated files; oldest pruned first.
.PP
\fBHoncho upstream\fR
.TP
.B HONCHO_BASE_URL
Default:
.BR https://api.honcho.dev .
Default Honcho upstream. The per-profile
.B baseUrl
field on
.B /api/profiles
overrides this per request.
.TP
.B HONCHO_API_VERSION
Default:
.BR v3 .
Path prefix for the upstream API.
.TP
.B HONCHO_REQUEST_TIMEOUT_MS
Default:
.BR 30000 .
RestClient timeout.
.PP
\fBFirst-startup bootstrap admin\fR
.TP
.B HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_USERNAME
Default: blank.
If set together with
.BR HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_PASSWORD ,
.B AdminBootstrap
creates the first admin on
.B ApplicationReadyEvent
when the
.B users
table is empty. The bundled jar ships this blank; production
opt-in is by populating the drop-in yaml. REMOVE these
credentials from the yaml after the first admin exists \(em
leaving them in is a credential-on-disk leak.
.TP
.B HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_PASSWORD
Default: blank.
Bootstrap password, min 8 chars. Set via secret manager, not in
the on-disk yaml.
.TP
.B HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_FIRSTNAME
Default: blank.
Optional first name.
.TP
.B HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_LASTNAME
Default: blank.
Optional last name.
.TP
.B HONCHO_BOOTSTRAP_ADMIN_EMAIL
Default: blank.
Optional email (must be unique if set).
.PP
\fBAudit log retention\fR
.TP
.B HONCHO_AUDIT_RETENTION_DAYS
Default:
.BR 90 .
Age cap for
.B audit_log
rows; rows older than this are purged by the daily
.B AuditRetentionJob
sweep. Set to 0 to disable the age window (size cap still applies).
.TP
.B HONCHO_AUDIT_MAX_ROWS
Default:
.BR 1000000 .
Size cap; if
.B COUNT(*) > max-rows
after the age window is applied, the oldest remaining rows are
deleted until the cap is satisfied. Set to 0 to disable the size
cap (age window still applies).
.TP
.B HONCHO_AUDIT_PURGE_CRON
Default:
.BR "0 0 3 * * *" .
Spring cron expression for the daily sweep (3:00 AM local). The
sweep records its own
.B audit.purge
audit row, but only when rows are actually deleted (a no-op run
is intentionally not audited to avoid daily noise).
.SH CONFIGURATION FILES
The service loads configuration in the following order, highest
priority first:
.IP 1. 4
Command-line flag (after
.BR \-\- ).
.IP 2.
Environment variable (Spring relaxed binding).
.IP 3.
Drop-in file at
.BR ${HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR}/application.yml ,
loaded additively.
.IP 4.
Bundled
.B application.yml
in the jar (defaults for dev).
.PP
The
.B etc/honcho-inspector/application.yml.example
file in the source tree is the canonical template for the drop-in
config. It includes the
.BR honcho.bootstrap.* " and"
.BR honcho.audit.* " blocks; the bundled jar's defaults for those"
two blocks are blank. Copy it to the OS config dir (see
.BR FILES )
and edit.
.SH FILES
The launcher script sets
.B HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR
based on the OS unless it is already in the environment:
.TP
.B /etc/honcho-inspector/
Linux.
.TP
.B /usr/local/etc/honcho-inspector/
FreeBSD.
.TP
.B /usr/local/etc/honcho-inspector/
macOS (Homebrew + manual install). Operators who installed via
the macOS installer (different prefix) may have it elsewhere;
inspect the Homebrew formula or the launchd plist's
.B ProgramArguments
to confirm.
.TP
.B %APPDATA%\\honcho-inspector\\
Windows.
.PP
The launcher also probes per-OS locations for the operator-tunable
env file. The file is mode
.B 0640
.BR root:<service group> " (the service group is "
.BR www-data " on Linux, "
.BR www " on FreeBSD, "
.BR _www " on macOS)."
Only
.B HONCHO_CRYPTO_KEY
and other operator-tunable runtime knobs live in this file. Data
paths (the SQLite DB, the config dir, the log dir) are set by the
init system unit, not the env file. A missing or unreadable env
file is silent: the launcher falls back to the launcher-supplied
defaults for the OS.
.TP
.B /etc/default/honcho-inspector
Linux (also
.BR /etc/sysconfig/honcho-inspector " on RHEL-family distros)."
.TP
.B /etc/default/honcho-inspector
FreeBSD. Operators who installed via the Homebrew-prefixed port may
also override with
.B ${HOMEBREW_PREFIX}/etc/honcho-inspector.env
(see
.BR service (8) " variables "
.BR honcho_inspector_env_file )."
.TP
.B /etc/defaults/honcho-inspector
macOS (plural — a macOS convention; the Linux singular form is
.BR /etc/default/ )."
Operators running the jar from a manual install (no launchd) may
also drop a per-user override at
.BR ~/Library/Application Support/honcho-inspector/env "."
.PP
Under
.BR ${HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR} :
.TP
.B application.yml
The drop-in configuration. Created by the operator.
.TP
.B honcho-inspector.db
The SQLite database. Created on first start.
.TP
.B logs/honcho-inspector.jsonl
The active structured log file. Rotated at
.BR HONCHO_LOG_MAX_FILE_SIZE ,
gzipped after rotation, and pruned by
.B HONCHO_LOG_TOTAL_SIZE_CAP
and
.BR HONCHO_LOG_MAX_HISTORY .
.PP
Under the source tree:
.TP
.B etc/honcho-inspector/application.yml.example
The drop-in config template. Copy this to the OS config dir
(see above) and edit.
.TP
.B docs/SECURITY.md
Threat model, audit findings (with status: Resolved/Open), and
the operator hardening checklist.
.TP
.B docs/reverse-proxy.md
nginx (primary), Apache, and Caddy configurations for terminating
TLS in front of the service.
.TP
.B docs/lessons/
Engineer's notes on what was learned during the rollout of each
major surface.
.SH INSTALLATION
The recommended install path is the platform's package manager.
A manual installer is also shipped for operators who do not want a
package.
.SS Package manager install (recommended)
.TP
.B macOS / Linux
.RB \(em " Homebrew / Linuxbrew"
.PP
.RS 4
.B brew install cloudbsdorg/honcho-inspector/honcho-inspector
.RE
.PP
Then enable the service:
.PP
.RS 4
.B brew services start honcho-inspector
.RE
.TP
.B FreeBSD
.RB \(em " ports tree"
.PP
.RS 4
.B cd /usr/ports/net/honcho-inspector \\
.br
.B   make install clean
.RE
.PP
Then enable the service by adding the line below to
.BR /etc/rc.conf :
.PP
.RS 4
.B honcho_inspector_enable="YES"
.RE
.PP
and start it:
.PP
.RS 4
.B service honcho_inspector start
.RE
.SS Manual install (POSIX)
For operators who do not use a package manager, the project ships
.BR bin/install-honcho-inspector .
The script:
.IP \(bu 2
Detects the OS and the Java binary.
.IP \(bu
Creates the service user
.RB ( www-data / www / _www )
if missing.
.IP \(bu
Creates the data, log, and config directories with the right
ownership and mode.
.IP \(bu
Copies the jar to
.BR /usr/local/lib/honcho-inspector/ .
.IP \(bu
Installs the per-OS service file
.RB ( /etc/systemd/system/honcho-inspector.service ,
.BR /usr/local/etc/rc.d/honcho_inspector ,
or
.BR /Library/LaunchDaemons/com.honcho.inspector.plist ).
.IP \(bu
Installs the man page to
.BR /usr/local/share/man/man1/ .
.IP \(bu
Drops a placeholder
.B /etc/default/honcho-inspector
env file (mode 0640
.RB root: www-data / www / _www ).
.IP \(bu
Enables and starts the service.
.PP
The script is idempotent: re-running after an upgrade re-installs
the jar and the service file. It does NOT overwrite an existing
.B application.yml
or the env file unless
.B --recreate-config
is passed.
.PP
The install runs as the dedicated unprivileged service user
.RB ( www-data / www / _www ).
A compromise of the backend process therefore cannot read
.BR /root ,
.BR /home ,
or other users' files, and cannot bind to privileged ports.
The systemd unit is hardened with
.BR "NoNewPrivileges=true" ,
.BR "ProtectSystem=strict" ,
.BR "PrivateTmp=true" ,
and similar directives (see
.BR etc/systemd/honcho-inspector.service
in the source tree).
.PP
The install script writes the database and the config dir but
does NOT generate the
.B HONCHO_CRYPTO_KEY
\(em the operator must set it in
.B /etc/default/honcho-inspector
with
.RB \(lq "openssl rand -base64 32" \(rq
after the install completes, then restart the service.
.SS Updating an existing install
.TP
.B Package manager
Run the package manager's upgrade command. On macOS:
.PP
.RS 4
.B brew upgrade honcho-inspector
.RE
.PP
On FreeBSD with pkg(8):
.PP
.RS 4
.B pkg upgrade honcho-inspector
.RE
.PP
On FreeBSD from source:
.PP
.RS 4
.B portmaster net/honcho-inspector
.RE
.TP
.B Manual
Re-run the install script. The data, log, config, and env dirs
are left untouched; only the jar and the service file are updated:
.PP
.RS 4
.B sudo bin/install-honcho-inspector
.RE
.SH ADMIN API
The service exposes 14 admin-only paths under
.BR /api/admin/ .
All require an
.B X-Session-Id
header whose session resolves to a user with
.BR isAdmin=true ;
enforcement is by the
.B @RequireAdmin
annotation plus
.BR AdminAuthInterceptor ,
declaratively on every handler in the namespace.
.PP
\fBUser management\fR
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/users
Paginated user list.
.B ?pageSize=10|20|30|ALL
(default 20). Returns
.B UserResponse
items; the
.B passwordHash
field is never included.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/users/search?q=
Case-insensitive LIKE substring match across
.BR username ,
.BR firstname ,
.BR lastname ,
and
.BR email .
Empty
.B q
lists all.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/users/{id}
One user.
.TP
.B POST /api/admin/users
Create a user with an explicit
.B isAdmin
role. Body:
.BI { username, password, " firstname?, lastname?, email?, isAdmin } .
.TP
.B PUT /api/admin/users/{id}
Update identity + role; all fields optional.
.TP
.B DELETE /api/admin/users/{id}
Delete a user; CASCADE removes their profiles and sessions.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/users/{id}/sessions
List a user's auth sessions.
.TP
.B POST /api/admin/users/{id}/sessions/revoke
Force-logout (returns
.BI { revoked: <count> } ).
.TP
.B POST /api/admin/users/{id}/password
Admin password reset (revokes all existing sessions of the target).
.PP
\fBAudit and dashboard\fR
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/audit
Query the audit log. Filters:
.BR ?actor= ,
.BR ?target= ,
.BR ?action= ,
.B ?since=
(ISO-8601),
.BR ?page= ,
.BR ?pageSize= .
Most-recent first.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/dashboard/overview
Local SQL aggregates (user / profile / audit counts, 7d / 30d
growth).
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/dashboard/users/{id}
Per-user drilldown: profile list, recent sessions, last 20 audit
events.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/dashboard/honcho
All profiles + parallel reachability probe (5s timeout per profile;
graceful degradation on partial failure).
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/dashboard/honcho/{profileId}
Per-profile Honcho drilldown: queue + workspace.
.TP
.B GET /api/admin/maintenance/status
Row counts + retention config.
.TP
.B POST /api/admin/maintenance/audit/purge
Manually trigger the
.B AuditRetentionJob
sweep; returns the deleted counts.
.TP
.B POST /api/admin/maintenance/sessions/purge-expired
Manually sweep
.B auth_sessions
where
.B expires_at < now .
.PP
\fBSelf-protection rules\fR
.RS 4
The last remaining admin cannot be demoted or deleted
(\fB409\fR), and a user cannot demote or delete themselves
(\fB409\fR). Enforced in
.BR AdminUserService ,
so the rule is independent of the controller layer. Recovery
from a lockout is via direct DB edit:
.PP
.RS 4
.B sqlite3 ${HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR}/honcho-inspector.db \\
.br
.B   "UPDATE users SET is_admin = 1 WHERE username = '<existing user>';"
.RE
.RE
.SH AUDIT LOG AND RETENTION
Every admin write path and every user-management mutation records
a row in
.B audit_log
with actor, action, target, IP, session, and a JSON metadata
map. Recorded actions:
.RS 4
.BR user.bootstrap ,
.BR user.create ,
.BR user.update ,
.BR user.delete ,
.BR user.sessions.revoke ,
.BR user.password.reset ,
.BR audit.purge ,
.BR sessions.purge .
.RE
.PP
Retention is 90 days age OR 1,000,000 rows, whichever fires
first. The daily sweep runs at
.BR HONCHO_AUDIT_PURGE_CRON
(default 3:00 AM local) and records its own
.B audit.purge
row when it actually deletes rows. The sweep is a no-op when
both retention windows are satisfied, in which case no audit row
is written.
.PP
To verify the sweep is running, query the audit log for the
sweep's own bookkeeping:
.PP
.RS 4
.B curl 'http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/admin/audit?action=audit.purge' \\
.br
.B   \-H "x\-session\-id: ${SID}"
.RE
.PP
Absence of recent
.B audit.purge
rows means the sweep stopped running; investigate the JSONL log
in
.BR ${HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR}/logs/honcho-inspector.jsonl .
.SH EMERGENCY ACTIONS
When the web server is unreachable (UI is down, the bootstrap admin
is locked out, the operator needs to act without going through the
API), the jar itself exposes five emergency-action subcommands.
They are dispatched in
.B DashboardApplication.main()
.B before
the web server starts, in a minimal Spring context (no HTTP server),
so they can be run while the service is stopped.
.PP
The CLI is intended to run with the service stopped. SQLite enforces
a single-writer lock; running the CLI while the service is up will
block on writes. The CLI does NOT authenticate the caller —
file-system permissions on the SQLite database and the operator's
shell account are the access control. Restrict access to the
service account (see
.BR FILES )
to the operators who should be able to run the CLI.
.PP
.SS Synopsis
.PP
.RS 4
.B honcho-inspector list-users
.br
.B honcho-inspector reset-admin-password --username NAME [--password PASS | --generate]
.br
.B honcho-inspector promote-to-admin --username NAME
.br
.B honcho-inspector revoke-all-sessions
.br
.B honcho-inspector help
.RE
.PP
.SS list-users
Print every row in the
.B users
table as a fixed-width table:
.PP
.RS 4
.B "ID                                USERNAME                 ADMIN    CREATED_AT"
.br
.B "abcdef0123456789...               alice                    yes      2026-06-22T01:00:00Z"
.br
.B "fedcba9876543210...               bob                      no       2026-06-22T01:00:00Z"
.RE
.PP
If the table is empty, prints
.BR "(no users)" "."
.SS reset-admin-password
Reset the password for the named user. One of
.B --password
or
.B --generate
is required. The password must be at least 8 characters.
.TP
.B --username NAME
Required. The username whose password to reset.
.TP
.B --password PASS
Set the new password to
.IR PASS .
Must be at least 8 characters.
.TP
.B --generate
Generate a fresh random 20-character URL-safe password and print it
once. The password is NOT stored anywhere after the CLI exits;
the operator must record it immediately.
.PP
On success, prints
.BR "password reset for user '<NAME>' (id=<ID>)" " and, if"
.B --generate
was used,
.BR "  new password: <RANDOM>" " followed by "
.BR "  IMPORTANT: this password is shown only once. Store it now." "."
.SS promote-to-admin
Set
.B is_admin = 1
for the named user. Idempotent: if the user is already an admin,
prints
.B "user '<NAME>' is already an admin"
and exits 0. Otherwise prints
.BR "user '<NAME>' (id=<ID>) promoted to admin" "."
.TP
.B --username NAME
Required.
.SS revoke-all-sessions
Wipe every row in the
.B auth_sessions
table, force-logging-out every user (including admins). Use this
when you suspect a session token has been compromised, or after a
bulk password reset. Prints
.BR "revoked <N> sessions; <M> remain" "."
.PP
The CLI does not prompt for confirmation. A second run is a no-op
(if no sessions exist) and prints
.BR "revoked 0 sessions; 0 remain" "."
.SS help
Print the synopsis above to stdout and exit 0. The Spring Boot
.B --help
flag (no subcommand) is different and prints the Spring Boot usage
banner.
.SH FIRST STARTUP
On a fresh install:
.IP 1. 4
Copy
.B etc/honcho-inspector/application.yml.example
to
.B /etc/honcho-inspector/application.yml
(Linux) or the OS-appropriate config dir.
.IP 2.
Set
.B HONCHO_CRYPTO_KEY
in the environment, not in the yaml. Generate with
.BR "openssl rand \-base64 32" .
.IP 3.
Set
.B CORS_ALLOWED_ORIGINS
to the exact public origin of the UI.
.IP 4.
Optionally populate
.B honcho.bootstrap.admin-username
and
.BR honcho.bootstrap.admin-password
to create the first admin on startup. Leave the bundled jar's
defaults blank in dev.
.IP 5.
Set
.B server.address
to
.B 127.0.0.1
in the drop-in yaml so the service is not reachable on the host's
external IPs. The reverse proxy is the public listener.
.IP 6.
Start the service:
.PP
.RS 8
.B sudo /usr/local/bin/honcho-inspector
.RE
.IP 7.
Pick a bootstrap path:
.RS
.IP \fBa\fR 4
.Config-file bootstrap (headless): the
.B honcho.bootstrap.*
block created the first admin on startup. Verify by logging in:
.PP
.RS 8
.B curl \-X POST http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/auth/login \\
.br
.B   \-H 'content\-type: application/json' \\
.br
.B   \-d '{"username":"admin","password":"..."}'
.RE
.IP \fBb\fR
.UI-driven bootstrap (with the Honcho Inspector UI): open the UI in
a browser. The UI calls
.B GET /api/health
and reads the
.B first_run
field (true when the database is empty). The UI shows a "create
your first admin" wizard which calls
.B POST /api/setup/first-admin
and returns the operator a session immediately. The
.B honcho.bootstrap.*
block in the yaml must be left blank for this path; if both paths
are populated, the config-file bootstrap fires first and the
UI-driven path returns 409.
.RE
.IP 8.
REMOVE the
.B honcho.bootstrap.*
credentials from the drop-in yaml and restart. Leaving them in
is a credential-on-disk leak.
.SH FIRST-RUN API
The first-run mode is exposed to the UI through two endpoints:
.TP
.B GET /api/health
Public. Returns
.BR {ok, first_run, needs_register} .
The
.B first_run
(and alias
.BR needs_register )
field is true when
.B users.count() == 0
— i.e. the service is in bootstrap state and the UI should show
the first-run wizard. Once any user exists, both fields are false.
Aggregate user / session / profile counts are NOT exposed here; they
live on the admin-only
.B /api/admin/dashboard/overview
endpoint.
.TP
.B POST /api/setup/first-admin
Public when the database is empty; returns 409 once any user
exists. Body is the same shape as
.B /api/auth/register
.RB ( "username" ", " password ", " firstname? ", " lastname? ", " email? " )"
with
.B password
required to be at least 8 characters. On success, returns the
same
.B LoginResponse
shape as
.BR /api/auth/login :
a session id and the user record with
.BR isAdmin = true .
After the first admin is created this way,
.B /api/setup/*
is locked and all further user management flows through
.BR /api/admin/users .
.SH RECOVERY FROM LOST ADMIN
If the bootstrap admin is lost (password forgotten, user
deleted, etc.), there are three recovery paths.
.IP 1. 4
Use the emergency-action CLI. With the web server
.BR stopped ,
run:
.PP
.RS 8
.B honcho-inspector list-users
.br
.B honcho-inspector reset-admin-password --username <existing> --generate
.br
.B honcho-inspector promote-to-admin --username <existing>
.RE
.PP
The CLI does not authenticate the caller — file-system
permissions on the SQLite DB and the operator's shell account
are the access control. Stop the service first (SQLite's
single-writer lock will block otherwise) and run the CLI as the
operator who owns the DB file (typically
.BR root
or the
.B www-data " / " www " / " _www
service user depending on the OS).
.IP 2.
If the
.B users
table is empty (e.g. the database was wiped), populate
.B honcho.bootstrap.*
in the drop-in yaml and restart. The bootstrap is a no-op
unless
.B users.count() == 0
and both
.B admin-username
and
.B admin-password
are set.
.IP 3.
If the
.B users
table is non-empty, set
.B is_admin = 1
on an existing user via
.BR sqlite3 :
.PP
.RS 8
.B sqlite3 ${HONCHO_CONFIG_DIR}/honcho-inspector.db \\
.br
.B   "UPDATE users SET is_admin = 1 WHERE username = '<existing user>';"
.RE
.PP
The login flow is unchanged; the promoted user logs in with
their existing password.
.PP
Recovery paths are listed in operator-preference order: the CLI
first (no yaml edit, no DB edit, no restart), config-file
bootstrap second (one yaml edit + restart), sqlite3 escape hatch
last (most invasive, requires shell access).
.SH EXIT STATUS
The launcher script
.BR bin/honcho-inspector " (or the installed"
.B /usr/local/bin/honcho-inspector
) returns:
.TP
.B 0
The service stopped cleanly, or an emergency-action CLI subcommand
completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
The Spring Boot context failed to start (port in use, missing
config, schema migration failure, etc.). The JSONL log captures
the root cause. Also returned when an unhandled exception escapes
the CLI dispatch path.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid command-line argument. Returned by the emergency-action
CLI for unknown subcommands, missing required flags
.RB ( " \-\-username" ", etc.)"
and contradictory flag combinations.
.TP
.B 3
User not found. The CLI subcommand's
.B --username
flag did not match any row in
.BR users .
.TP
.B 4
Validation error. A password was too short, a username was empty,
or a similar input constraint was violated.
.TP
.B 5
Database error. The CLI subcommand caught a runtime exception
while writing to the SQLite database (locked DB, missing column,
disk-full, etc.). The JSONL log captures the root cause.
.PP
The CLI exit codes
.BR 3 ", " 4 " and " 5
are not used by the web-server launcher; only the emergency-action
subcommands return them. Shell scripts branching on the exit code
should default to
.B 0
for success and treat any non-zero code as failure.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM
Initiate a graceful shutdown. Spring Boot's actuator will run
the standard shutdown hooks; in-flight requests are allowed to
complete for up to 30 seconds before the process is killed.
.TP
.B SIGINT
Same as
.B SIGTERM
when sent from a terminal (Ctrl-C).
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Ignored. The service does not reload configuration on
.BR SIGHUP ;
a full restart is required to pick up yaml or environment
changes.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR honcho (1)
(upstream product; not a separate man page),
.BR install-honcho-inspector (8)
(manual install script shipped with the project),
.BR sqlite3 (1),
.BR nginx (8),
.BR caddy (8),
.BR openssl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR service (8)
(FreeBSD),
.BR launchctl (1)
(macOS)
.PP
Project documentation:
.IP \(bu 2
.B README.md
\(em developer entry point
.IP \(bu
.B docs/SECURITY.md
\(em threat model, audit findings, hardening checklist
.IP \(bu
.B docs/reverse-proxy.md
\(em reverse proxy examples
.IP \(bu
.B docs/honcho-providers.md
\(em provider layer architecture
.IP \(bu
.B docs/lessons/admin-rbac-rollout.md
\(em engineering notes on the admin RBAC rollout
.IP \(bu
.B docs/openapi.yaml
\(em hand-written OpenAPI 3 narrative contract
.PP
Upstream Honcho documentation:
.RB < https://docs.honcho.dev >
.SH BUGS
.IP \(bu 2
No rate limit on
.BR /api/auth/login .
A credential-stuffing attacker can probe indefinitely. The
mitigation is the reverse proxy's rate limit (see
.BR reverse-proxy.md ).
.IP \(bu
No rate limit on
.BR /api/auth/register .
The endpoint is admin-only, so the surface is smaller, but a
compromised admin credential can be used to create unlimited
user accounts. Same mitigation.
.IP \(bu
.B SessionAuthFilter
does not set
.B Cache-Control: no-store
on authenticated responses. The
.B X-Session-Id
header is the only auth credential, but a caching proxy that
ignores Vary could in theory serve a previous user's data. The
mitigation is the same reverse proxy.
.IP \(bu
Audit retention is fire-and-forget (see
.BR "AUDIT LOG AND RETENTION" ).
A broken
.B audit_log
table is logged at WARN but does not block user CRUD. Operators
should monitor the JSONL log for
.B AdminAudit
WARN events.
.IP \(bu
The drift check between
.B docs/openapi.yaml
and the live springdoc snapshot is intentionally narrow
(paths, methods, operationIds only). It does not check schemas,
parameters, requestBody, responses, or descriptions, so the
hand-written file can drift from the live implementation in
those dimensions. The OpenAPI spec, the live test suite, and
the implementation are the canonical sources for the rich
shape.
.SH AUTHOR
Honcho Inspector maintainers <honcho-inspector@example.com>
.PP
Project:
.RB < https://github.com/cloudbsdorg/honcho-inspector-backend >
